Fable 5 is the best model in the world,
and I know you can't access it. I can't
access it either. I am making this
review available to you so that we can
call the energy into the universe to
bring it back. Kidding aside, we need to
find a way to talk about what this model
is capable of because it shapes what we
are going to experience from a bunch of
models in the next few months. And so,
you should be expecting this kind of big
model feeling from Chat GPT models that
are dropping in the next month or so.
You should be expecting this from
open-source models in the next 4 5 6
months. I want to drop this Fable 5
model review now because, yes, I hope
Fable comes back soon. But, also, we are
all going to be needing to ask different
kinds of questions of our models as we
start to work with these 10 trillion
parameter models. And yes, I think Fable
5 is a 10 trillion parameter model. I'm
not the only one that thinks that. It's
a massive new pre-train, and the big
model feeling is all over this model.
I'm very excited about it. I hope we get
it back soon. In the meantime, enjoy
this review. Claude Table 5 came out on
Tuesday. And if you're tired of hearing
that an AI model changes everything,
stay with me for a second because you're
the person this video is for. I get
tired of the insane adjectives, too,
right? It's terrifying. It's speechless.
Best model ever. We'll all lose our
jobs. And look, I got to tell you, there
is a real capability jump with this
model. But, I am less interested in that
and more interested in what you can do
with this model. And that is what I
think is worth a conversation because
Fable 5 is not interesting because it's
smarter. It's not interesting because it
benchmark maxes. It's interesting
because it's bigger. And I mean that in
a very specific way. It is the first
model I've used where the limit I kept
hitting was not the model running out of
ability. It was me running out of big
things to ask for. Just sit with how
strange that is. 3 years of these models
breaking on our work. And the new
constraint is our ability to imagine the
ask. So today I want to walk you through
five things that Fable 5 resets about
this moment in the AI race. And only the
first one is about the model. The rest
are about your work, about why AI has
probably felt smaller than advertised in
your actual life. What skill changes
that and what to do differently this
week. And by the end you'll know whether
you have a Fable sized job on your desk.
I bet you do. I think you have several
and I think that you've stopped seeing
them because we've never been taught to
see them. So
what does a bigger model feel like?
Models tend to fail this in predictable
ways, right? They promote garbage into
clean data, they smooth over conflicts,
they fix things and leave you wondering
what else they fixed that you didn't ask
for. Fable did something I'd never seen
before. It quarantined the garbage in
the data instead of fixing it. It found
the fake credentials and inventory them
without leaking them and then, and this
is the part that got me, it built me a
review queue. Every call it wasn't sure
about it surfaced to a human to check. I
didn't ask it to do that. It behaved
like it expected to be checked.
Somewhere in the middle of this journey
with Fable I stopped hovering. I handed
work over and then I really did go and
do something else.
And I've always had to kind of keep an
eye on these models. It's never been my
relationship with these models because I
care about quality to just not, you
know, walk away and not pay attention.
With Fable, if I give it the task, I
really do feel like I can walk away. And
that has not been my relationship with
these models in the past. And I'm not
the only one. The people with early
access keep reaching for similar words.
And it's not necessarily smarter. They
talk about whole projects handed off.
Stripe says it compressed months of
engineering work into days. And after
touching and playing with this model for
the last couple of days, three days,
four days, it feels true. Now, before
this turns into yet another hype video,
there are real misses with this model.
One, it's expensive. 50 bucks per
million output tokens is not cheap. The
visual taste is not where it needs to
be, right? I asked it to do visual
designs. It did not one-shot them at the
quality bar that I would expect. For
example, it produced clipped headings in
PowerPoints and charts a designer would
wince at at times. It missed information
that only existed in handwritten images
until I explicitly forced it to look
there, and every single run still ended
with a review work that had to land on
my desk to check. So, bigger doesn't
mean that it's finished and work is
done. There are people who are out there
saying this means engineering work is
over, as usual, right? Like we've seen
that with every model. So, bigger
doesn't mean this model is perfect.
Bigger means it can pick up and carry
the job, and I can trust it to do that,
and I just have to have a look at it
when it's done. And uh really, the task
then is to imagine something large
enough, right? And that's why I talk
about a whole consulting engagement, cuz
that's the kind of scale that you want
to give this model. Think back. In 2023
and 2024, asking big got you burned,
right? You handed a model something
real, and it lost the thread by step
six, and it invented a source, and it
gave you a confident wrong number, a
hallucination. So, you did the rational
thing. You found the safe size for what
this AI stuff could do, right? Ask it
for one draft. Verify everything. Keep
things short and structured.
But, we didn't just learn to ask small
in that world. We got really good at
asking small, and our whole mental model
for AI became about the size of the
model that we were working with. We
built our routines around it. Prompt
engineering became a skill, and then a
job title because of the size of the
model. Every AI productivity guide,
including plenty of mine, has been
assuming a certain model scale. But, the
models kept growing, and our asks and
our imagination did not. And that's
really the gap. That's the whole gap
between the headlines and how your day
feels. If your asks are prompt sized,
every frontier model, including this
one, including Fable, is going to feel
basically the same. And at the size
you've been asking for in terms of work,
none of these models are going to make a
difference. Fable 5 has made that
problem impossible to ignore. Partly
because of what it can do, and partly
bluntly because of what it costs. At
these prices and speeds, small asks are
not worth the money, right? It's a waste
of the model. This is not a model I
would use to write a slightly better
email. This is not a daily driver model.
Nobody should spend Fable money on a
summary of what a cheap model can do in
a few seconds. The economics are begging
you to ask bigger.
And yes, we're going to get into what
that looks like next. And that brings us
to the third key point in this video. We
need the skill of task imagination. Not
ask them, give them. Do you feel the
difference? Ask suggests a prompt. Give
is going to produce a job. I'm going to
give you a pile of source material, a a
goal for a finished thing at the end,
and I'm going to tell you to sort out
the judgment calls along the way with a
series of like rough guidelines. I've
been calling the skill detailed task
imagination, the ability to look at your
own work and see the whole job that an
AI could do if it had the right context
and the right tools and a clear picture
of what done looks like. And now, before
anybody says in the comments, "Nate,
this is the delegation talk again." It's
not, and the difference matters.
Delegation is about tasks you have.
They're in your tracker, they have a
name on it. I and I've made the case for
a while that you can delegate jobs to
AI.
This is about jobs that are bigger than
that, that aren't on anybody's tracker
yet because they're dirty and ambiguous.
And yes, I'm picking those big numbers
on purpose because these are numbers
that you need to make sure that you
think about when you assign this model.
If you give Fable 5 a small task, it
does get it done, it's just kind of a
waste of the muscle of the model. So,
look for those tasks that nobody has
written down because until now, either
nobody was going to get to them or they
felt so big there wasn't any point in
assigning the model to them, right?
These tasks are what working here feels
like, right? These tasks are what makes
the job painful, right? And then figure
out how you can make that task visible
to Fable, right? How do you take the
40,000 reviews and shove them at Fable?
That's one of our larger questions now,
right? How do you take a full CRM export
and say, "I want to merge across 2
million customer records, the
duplicates, what's stale, the account
briefs, all of it, and make sure it's
reproducible." How do you take that
500-page board packet and make sure that
it's actually fact-checked and aligned?
This model needs a lot of material to
chew through. It needs a clear sense of
what done looks like, and it needs a
trail you can review. And yes, this is
also a coding model. I know that I have
given you several examples that are not
coding. I'm doing that on purpose
because I think we often assume these
models are good at coding, and that's a
correct assumption here. Fable 5 tests
well and is a very, very strong coding
model. It's thoughtful, it's thorough,
it tackles big task. It's exactly what
I've been describing for code, right?
It's something where you can ask it to
refactor an entire repo and it can do
it. So,
you need to think now in that world,
whether you're an engineering or not an
engineering, about what it takes to put
that scale in front of this model. And I
would encourage you along the way, write
down what done means before you start to
feed the model. Make sure it's really
clear. Make sure it's a clear paragraph
what you want to exist at the end of
this model's task. Then hand it over,
and this is the hard part, walk away.
Let it run. The itch to hover is 3 years
of trained habit with AI, and that habit
is what's out of date. It's actually not
our business, judgment, our sense of
what's good. It's actually that we have
trained our habits around AI being too
small. And so, when Fable comes back,
review it like an owner reviewing a
senior stakeholder's work. Check that
the work was done correctly. Check that
it's angled right. Check that it
actually reflects the full scope of what
you asked it to do.
And then, if you need to, assign it work
to do to fix what's what's necessary
along the way, right? Assign it revision
work. If every finished job
helps you to run your business faster,
if every finished job helps you as a
worker to feel like it lifts a tangible
load off your shoulders cuz it's
tackling something that was incredibly
painful for you that was too big for AI
before,
that's going to matter. That's how you
know you're assigning Fable-sized work.
And that's true whether you're in
product management or engineering or
sales or marketing. Think at Fable
scale.
You basically have an incredibly
powerful magician
sitting there in your computer, and all
you have to do to make it work is to
give it raw material to work that magic
on, and give it a sense of what good
looks like. When you want to try Fable,
don't sit down in front of your
computer. Instead, sit down and write
the weather around your work. Write the
stuff that is hovering like rain clouds
over your work that are nasty and gnarly
and that nobody owns, that everyone on
your team knows needs to be done. If it
makes you sigh and and face-palm, it's
going to qualify. Then, take the time to
say which is the one that's most
valuable to me to get done.
Figure out where that data lives, and
then start to build a data pack that you
can hand over to Fable to do that job.
It should take you time to assemble that
data pack, by the way. You may take a
couple three or four hours to get ready
to give this model this job, but if you
do that and it saves you 2 weeks of
work, it's clearly worth it. That's the
level of preparation we need to have to
prompt this model and that's why I do
not call it a daily driver. It's just
it's too expensive and it's too overkill
to do that. You do it for serious work.
This saves you serious time. If Fable
gets you one job a week that saves you
two weeks of time, it's easily worth it.
It's easily worth it. And so that's
that's what I want you to do. Write down
what is stressing you out about work.
Write down what you want Fable to tackle
and then make sure that you think about
the data Fable needs to do that job and
give it to it.
And then make sure you think about the
data Fable needs to do that job and give
Fable that data. So the fifth part, I
want to be really honest with you. I'm
going to talk about how a model that can
do two weeks of work is going to change
the jobs picture. People will look at it
and I've seen takes like this from very
prominent content creators and they will
say, "This is going to be a job killer."
The only jobs that this model is going
to kill are are jobs that are strict
execution, where there is zero judgment.
And part of why I'm saying that is that
this model needs a lot of care and
feeding. You need model managers for
this model to do well. You need people
who will be able to say, "This is the
scope and scale and direction and this
is the data that we're feeding this
model to get the work done." Now, does
that mean that we're seeing a tremendous
disruption in how we spend our days with
AI and we should expect more along the
way as these models scale? Yes. Does it
mean that we need to abstract ourselves
and operate at a different level and
think of ourselves, even if we're not
people managers, as model managers?
Absolutely. But, this model still needs
to be directed, it still needs to be
aimed, it needs to be fed, it needs to
be judged, it needs people to review the
work it did. And so the only people who
should be worried about AI and jobs are
the people who are doing manual tasks
that really could have been automated
anytime in the last 10 years and maybe
they were. You can watch this video and
you can say and to yourself, I want to
use Fable. How can I do it in my role?
And pretty much no one's going to stop
you. If you have the imagination and the
courage to think differently about what
you can do because you did the exercise,
you wrote down the things that are
stressing you out, you gave it to Fable,
Fable did this work and now it's working
better, no one's going to stop you from
doing that. In fact, that's that's an
invitation to a promotion these days.
That's an invitation to career success.
And yes, if you're a leader, it's going
to require you to think differently
about data availability. It's If Fable
is going to require you to think
differently about token economics.
There's all kinds of leader questions
that this opens up as well. But the
larger thing I want you to take away is
that if we just reduce this to this
assumption that the magician that is
this model can magically do our jobs, we
are guilty of simplistic thinking. We
are guilty of over assuming what this
model can do. A model that can do a lot
of work at a pretty high quality bar is
a very, very powerful thing and
simultaneously
not going to be a model that can just
lift and shift out jobs at will because
it needs that direction, because it
needs someone to manage all the data,
because it needs judgment about what
works. These models take a ton of care
and feeding. The people I know working
in AI, working with AI models not at
hyperscalers are working harder than
they've ever worked in their lives. They
are not working themselves out of a job,
they are working themselves into new
jobs because these models take that kind
of care. So, if this is you and you are
worried about
AI layoffs and you look at the
capability and my my description of this
model is larger and the fact that this
has incredible benchmark results like to
be honest with you, I'm going to have to
change my benchmarks because this model
has already maxed my benchmark. If
you're worried by that, I would invite
you to instead think about asking the
model for bigger tasks and what that
asks of us. If we can do that
collectively, we are going to be in a
much better spot to manage these models
and the impact that they can have on
work. Because we'll be asking ourselves,
how can we tackle really gnarly problems
with these models that humans struggle
with? How can we make a trade where the
pain, the frustration of working through
500 pages looking for typos, and working
through 500 pages looking for
consistency issues, and working through
40,000 customer records, that's painful.
How can we trade that pain to a model
that's good at it and in return get time
back to do more high-leverage stuff.
That's the invitation of models like
Fable. Use Fable to eat the pain in your
business. If you do, you are not going
to regret it. In fact, you, even as an
individual contributor, are going to be
on the road to an incredible career
uplift. Because these models effectively
will be like a personal magician in your
pocket and will make you incredibly
powerful at work. And I'm not saying
that because I want, you know, to hype
this and say, "Oh, it's going to be
amazing." It's just a fact. Like these
models have that kind of power. I have
seen hundreds of examples and real
stories in my Substack community from
people who had done that with weaker
models than Fable, and Fable is stronger
yet. So, it's possible. You just have to
imagine bigger. If this was useful to
you, if you want to go deeper and
understand what does What does
imagination look like? What do I do
differently with this model? That is
what the Substack is for. I have a whole
job spec that I give you to like go
through and tackle if you want to tackle
a big a big task with Fable. I have a
entire guide on stripping out your
prompts and adjusting them for Fable cuz
you're going to have to do that, too.
I've got a a set of Fable specific
skills that help when Fable is
struggling with something for you. For
example, writing. Like if you need to
get Fable to read your voice, what does
that look like? If you need to get Fable
to understand your house style with
PowerPoint and Excel. If you need to get
Fable to understand how you structured
your data. How do you communicate that
when you're not using the traditional
pro- I go into all of that detail on the
Substack so that you can take this and
actually level up your productivity with
the biggest model in the world, the best
coder in the world. It is the best model
in the world. Let's just not sugarcoat
it. But how do you use it? That's what
matters. I'm going to have more very
clear-eyed analysis coming up soon. We
have some exciting stuff from OpenAI
coming. And we have other models in the
landscape, too. We're going to talk
about a wider range of models beyond the
traditional OpenAI and Claude models, as
well. So, lots more coming. Subscribe,
and I'll see you next time.